# Action Calculus Reasoning

## Specializes

[[AutomatedReasoning]]

## Classification

[[!taglink awareness]], [[!taglink reasoning]],
[[!taglink edlc/validation]]

## Intent

Allow agents to come up with solutions to situations that could not be
provided at design time by reasoning about action-calculus formulae.

## Context

Agents often encounter situations for which no ready-made solution can
be provided by the designers. In many cases, reasoning about these
situations requires reasoning about the effect of actions while taking
into account spatial, temporal and logical aspects.  For example,
deducing "If I pick up the victim and carry it to the rescue area, the
victim will receive medical treatmen within the next hour." requires
all three types of reasoning.

## Description/Behavior

Action Calculus Reasoning is a special case of [[AutomatedReasoning]]
where the knowledge repository is represented as a set of formulae in
an actions-calculus and the reasoning process is either full inference
in predicate logic or a simpler form of reasoning, e.g., SLDNF
resolution.  Suitable action calculi are, e.g., the situation
calculus, the fluent calculus or the event calculus.


## Consequences

The consequences of using Action Calculus Reasoning depend on the
logic and reasoning mechanisms used.

Action Calculus Reasoning based on full first order logic using a
theorem prover as reasoning mechanism is one of the most expressive
variants of [[AutomatedReasoning]].  However it requires highly
skilled modelers to provide a logical world model.  Without tuning the
reasoning mechanism to the requirements of the application domain,
reasoning times are likely to be prohibitively high.  By optimizing
model and reasoner, the performance can often be improved
significantly and may prove acceptable for high-level decision making
in many scenarios.  However, reasoning times are alway unpredictable
and mostly too high for time-critical tasks or low-level aspects of a
system.  The reasoning process can be sped up, often by several orders
of magnitude, if reasoning about historical facts is not performed
using logical regression only but rather by looking up ground facts in
a database.  Special-purpose reasoners for reasoning about particular
domains, e.g., involving temporal or spatial properties, can also
greatly enhance the performace.

Action Calculus Reasoning based on logic programming generally has
less severe performance restrictions, and it is easier to achieve the
performance required for on-line reasoning.  However, the resulting
system is much less expressive than a system using a full first-order
representation, and performance may suffer if many inferences using
negated formulae are required.

## Implementation

Logic-programming based Action Calculus Reasoning systems can easily
be implemented on top of Prolog implementations, e.g., by using one of
the existing Golog implementations.  Specialized systems that are not
embedded in logic-programming systems also exist, e.g., the Flux
action programming language and implementation.

Systems based on more general action-calculus reasoning require the
embedding of a theorem prover into the system.  The Snark prover is
particularly well suited for these kinds of applications since it is
specialized for reasoning about large data sets and provides
mechanisms for defining procedural attachments that solve particular
reasoning tasks.  Procedural attachments can also be used to implement
data-base based reasoning about historical facts.

The following is a simple formalization of a robot movement problem in
an action calculus (a variant of the classical situation calculus) for
the Snark theorem prover.

The specification makes use of the fact that Snark supports sorted
logic.  This improves performance since it greatly reduces the search
space for inferences, and it helps avoid errors.

    (declare-sort 'situation)
    (declare-sort 'action)
    (declare-sort 'object)
    (declare-sort 'direction)
	
By default sorts in Snark are not incompatible, so we have to inform
the systems that they may not overlap.	
	
    (declare-sorts-incompatible 'situation 'action 'object 'direction)
	
Robots are a subsort of `object`.  In this simple example the
introduction of a subtype relationship would not really be necessary,
but it may simplify more complex example, since it helps avoid
introducing many implications that are otherwise required to translate
type correctness into pure logic.
	
    (declare-subsort 'robot 'object)

Situations are, roughly speaking, sequences of actions that were
performed.  The basic operation to extend situations with new actions,
and thus "progress time" in the situation calculus is `do` which takes
an action and a situation as arguments, and returns a new situation.
	
    (declare-function 'do 2 :sort '(situation action situation) :injective t)


We introduce constants for the four directions that describe the
possible movements of the robots.  Since Snark does not presume that
different constants represents distinct objects, we have to specify
axioms that assert that this is the case.

    (declare-constant 'north :sort 'direction)
    (declare-constant 'east :sort 'direction)
    (declare-constant 'south :sort 'direction)
    (declare-constant 'west :sort 'direction)
    (assert '(not (= north east)))
    (assert '(not (= north south)))
    (assert '(not (= north west)))
    (assert '(not (= east west)))
    (assert '(not (= east south)))
    (assert '(not (= south west)))


`move-robot` is a constructor for actions: given a robot and a
direction, `move-robot` returns an action that describes moving the
robot in the specified direction.  This action can then be used as
argument to `do` to create new situations.

    (declare-function 'move-robot 2
                      :sort '(action robot direction)
                      :injective t)

 The `robot-position-x` function describes the *x* coordinate of the
 robot in a given situation.  A similar function can be used to
 describe the *y* coordinate.
 
    (declare-function 'robot-position-x 2
                      :sort '(integer robot situation)
                      :injective t)

The followin axiom expresses the "dynamics" of the model, i.e., the
relationship between the actions performed and the position of the
robot.  Again, a similar axiom can be used to describe movement in the
*y* position.

    (assert
     '(forall ((r :sort robot)
               (a :sort action)
               (s :sort situation)
               (p :sort integer))
       (iff (= (robot-position-x r (do a s)) p)
            (or (and (= a (move-robot r east))
			         (= (robot-position-x r s) ($$sum 1 p)))
                (and (= a (move-robot r west))
				     (= (robot-position-x r s) ($$sum -1 p)))
                (and (not (= a (move-robot r east)))
				     (not (= a (move-robot r west)))
                (= (robot-position-x r s) p)))))
       :supported nil
       :sequential t)

Given this specification, questions such as 

(prove '(forall ((r :sort robot)
                     (s1 :sort situation))
               (exists ((p :sort integer)
                        (a :sort action :global t))
                  (and (= (robot-position-x r (do a s1)) p)
                       (implies
                         (= (robot-position-x r (do a s1)) p)
                         (= (robot-position-x r s1) ($$difference p 1))))))
            :answer '(ans a))

which can be translated as "Is there an action that changes the *x*
coordinate of the robot?"  With appropriate settings for its inference
engine, Snark will compute the two solutions, `west` and `east`.

## Applications

Action Calculus Reasoning has been used for applications in
cognitive robotics and swarm robotics.

[[!tag pattern]]
