# Auction

## Specializes

[[CooperationMechanism]]

## Classification

[[!taglink cooperation]], [[!taglink ensemble]], [[!taglink edlc/design]]

## Intent

Cooperation between agents with possibly diverging utility functions.

## Motivation

The distribution of tasks and resources among the components of an
ensembles is a difficult problem.  One general solution mechanism is
to collect bids for tasks and resources and to allocate them to the
highest bidder.

## Applicability

Auctions are only applicable if agents can communicate reliably with
each other and if agents have a unique identity.  In many cases, for
example when business secrets are exchanged as part of the bid, secure
communication between agents is necessary.

## Description/Behavior

There are many different variants of auctions and describing the
variants goes beyond the current scope of the pattern catalogue.  The
general principle is that individual agents bid on the price of a
resource or offer to perform work in exchange for a certain payment.
An auctioneer collects the bids and decides on the winner of the
auction (often the highest or second-highest bidder).  For the time
being, see
[Multiagent Systems by Shoham and Leyton-Brown](http://www.masfoundations.org)
for various auction mechanisms.

## Consequences

Multiple agents can agree on the allocation of tasks without having to
share a value function or trusting each other.  In general the
auctioneer has to be trusted to rely on the specified protocol and, if
the agents compete against each other, to keep the details of the
offers secret.

## Related Patterns

## Applications

[[!tag pattern]]
