# Automated Reasoning

## Classification

[[!taglink reasoning]], [[!taglink awareness]],
[[!taglink edlc/design]], [[!taglink edlc/awareness]],
[[!taglink edlc/adaptation]]

## Intent

Allow agents to come up with solutions to situations that could not be
provided at design time.

## Context

Agents often encounter situations for which no ready-made solution can
be provided by the designers.  This may simply be because the solution
depends on data that only becomes available at run time, e.g., the
start and destination for a route planner.  In more complex ensembles,
for example rescue operations in complex environment or computer
assistants operating in complex social settings, agents may encounter
situations that could not be foreseen at design time.

## Description/Behavior

If the goals of the agent and the situation it encountered can be
translated into a format that is understood by an automated reasoner,
the solution to the problem can, in many cases, be derived without
further input from the designers.

## Consequences

Ideally, a system using Automated Reasoning can react to unforeseen
situations in a flexiple and appropriate manner without any input from
operators or supervisors.

## Implementation

Because of the wide variety of Automated Reasoning mechanisms there is
no universal architecture shared by them all. A typical architecture
of an Automated Reasoning mechanisms consists of a knowledge
repository and one or more application-domain-independent reasoning
engines, possibly augmented with domain-specific reasoners.  The
results of the reasoning engine when faced with a query is typically a
plan comprised of a sequence of actions that are supposed to reach the
desired goal when executed starting with the current state of the
system.

## Related Patterns

There are many specialized reasoning patterns, e.g.,
[[ActionCalculusReasoning]] or [[AlgorithmicPlanning]].
[[ReinforcementLearning]] can often be complement or even replace
Automated Reasoning in systems where the full specification of the
environment cannot be obtained at design time.

[[!tag pattern]]
