# Awareness-Based Behavior

## Classification

[[!taglink ensemble]], [[!taglink edlc/design]], [[!taglink edlc/awareness]]

## Aliases

Intelligent System, Cognitive System

## Intent

Allow an ensemble to operate in complex, unknown environments and situations.

## Motivation

Ensembles often have to operate in environments whose properties are not completely known; they often encounter situations where complex decisions have to be taken.  Predetermining the desired behaviors at design time is often difficult or impossible.  A more feasible approach in these situations is to equip the ensemble with an awareness model and goals or a measure of utility and to use this information to compute desirable behaviors at run time.

## Applicability

This pattern is applicable when structural information about the environment is available and either a [Small Ontology] or a [Big Ontology] for the domain can be provided. Furthermore the ensemble has to be able to ascertain its runtime situation with enough precision to ensure that the awareness model predicts future situations with high-enough quality to be useful.  Depending on the size and complexity of the awareness model, significant computational resources and storage might have to be available at run time.\n\nWhen these requirements are not satisfied, [Model-Free Learning] may provide some of the same benefits but potentially require many training runs.  If the run-time resources are not available, [Simulation In The Loop] or [Simulation At Design Time] may be alternatives.

## Description/Behavior

An *awareness mechanism* consists of an *awareness model* which is inversely connected to the environment, *reasoners* that can draw inferences from the awareness model, and a *sensor system* that maintains the inverse connection.  See [[AwarenessMechanism]] for details.  Together with either an explicit specification of the ensemble's goals or a utility function for the system's actions an awareness mechanism can determine actions that are expected to maximize system performance.\n\nAn awareness model is often a [Multi-Model] and a [[DeepModel]], in particular it often combines [[LogicalModel]]s and [[ProbabilisticModel]]s.

## Consequences

Awareness-Based Behaviors allow systems to operate in a wide range of environments and to dynamically update their goals at runtime.  It relies on systems having sufficient sensors and computing resources to maintain the necessary level of awareness, therefore use of this pattern may increase the cost, size and energy consumption of a system.

## Implementation

Instances of this pattern can be sen in all ASCENS case studies.  For exampl, the ASCENS autonomic cloud case study presents an example for an awareness-based system in the context of a cloud environment.  The ASCENS Academia example shows the application of this pattern using [[DistributedAwarenessBasedBehavior]] via [[TeacherStudentLearning]] in the context of swarm robotics.

## Variants

## Related Patterns

## Applications

[[!tag pattern]]
